---
layout: post
title: New Machine Learning Tool Tracks Urban Traffic Congestion
date: 2020-12-11
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning, data management]

---

### Article Source
* [New Machine Learning Tool Tracks Urban Traffic Congestion](https://www.pnnl.gov/news-media/new-machine-learning-tool-tracks-urban-traffic-congestion)

----


## New Machine Learning Tool Tracks Urban Traffic Congestion 

[Karyn Hede,](/people/karyn-hede) PNNL
 
 
*UBER driver data helps track and potentially alleviate urban traffic congestion*

 
*Pacific Northwest National Laboratory's TranSEC traffic estimator gives traffic engineers current traffic state awareness to help inform decision making and infrastructure planning.*

 
A new machine learning algorithm is poised to help urban transportation
analysts relieve bottlenecks and chokepoints that routinely snarl city
traffic.

The tool, called **TranSEC**, was developed at the U.S. Department of
Energy's [Pacific Northwest National Laboratory](https://www.pnnl.gov/)
to help urban traffic engineers get access to actionable information
about traffic patterns in their cities.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8S4bLv9CtOo" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


*TranSEC is working to solve urban traffic congestion and get you home
faster and safer.
(Video by Graham Bourque | Pacific Northwest National Laboratory)*

Currently, publicly available traffic information at the street level is
*sparse* and *incomplete*. Traffic engineers generally have relied on
isolated traffic counts, collision statistics and speed data to
determine roadway conditions. The new tool uses [traffic
datasets](https://movement.uber.com) **collected from UBER drivers and
other publicly available traffic sensor data** to map *street-level traffic
flow* over time. It creates a big picture of city traffic using machine
learning tools and the computing resources available at a national
laboratory.  

"What's novel here is the street level estimation over a large
metropolitan area," said Arif Khan, a PNNL computer scientist who helped
develop TranSEC. "And unlike other models that only work in one specific
metro area, our tool is portable and can be applied to any urban area
where aggregated traffic data is available."

UBER-fast traffic analysis
--------------------------

TranSEC (which stands for *transportation state estimation capability*)
differentiates itself from other traffic monitoring methods by its
ability to analyze *sparse* and *incomplete* information. **It uses machine
learning to connect segments with missing data, and that allows it to
make near real-time street level estimations.**

In contrast, the map features on our smart phones can help us optimize
our journey through a city landscape, pointing out chokepoints and
suggesting alternate routes. But smart phone tools only work for an
individual driver trying to get from point A to point B. City traffic
engineers are concerned with how to help *all* vehicles get to their
destinations efficiently. Sometimes a route that seems efficient for an
individual driver leads to too many vehicles trying to access a road
that wasn't designed to handle that volume of traffic.

![*TranSEC's near real-time display of traffic state estimation in the
entire Los Angeles Metro Area at 6 p.m. on a weekday. This display was
computed in less than one hour. Green areas indicate traffic is flowing
freely and yellow and red areas indicate congestion. (Image courtesy of
Arun Sathanur | Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory)*](https://www.pnnl.gov/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail/public/media/image/TranSEC%20Los%20Angeles.jpg?itok=2N3hfe9_)

Using public data from the entire 1,500-square-mile Los Angeles
metropolitan area, the team reduced the time needed to create a traffic
congestion model by an order of magnitude, from hours to minutes. The
speed-up, accomplished with high-performance computing resources at
PNNL, makes near-real-time traffic analysis feasible. The research team
recently presented that analysis at the August 2020 virtual Urban
Computing Workshop as part of the Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(SIGKDD) conference, and in September 2020 they sought the input of
traffic engineers at a virtual meeting on TranSEC.

"TranSEC has the potential to initiate a paradigm shift in how traffic
professionals monitor and predict system mobility performance," said
Mark Franz, a meeting attendee and a research engineer at the Center for
Advanced Transportation Technology, University of Maryland, College
Park. "TranSEC overcomes the inherent data gaps in legacy data
collection methods and has tremendous potential." 

Machine learning improves accuracy over time
--------------------------------------------

The machine learning feature of TranSEC means that as more data is
acquired and processed it becomes more refined and useful over time.
This kind of analysis is used to understand how disturbances spread
across networks. Given enough data, the machine learning element will be
able to predict impacts so that traffic engineers can create corrective
strategies.

"We use a *graph-based model* together with novel *sampling* methods and
optimization engines, to learn both the travel times and the routes,"
said Arun Sathanur, a PNNL computer scientist and a lead researcher on
the team. "The method has significant potential to be expanded to other
modes of transportation, such as transit and freight traffic. As an
analytic tool, it is capable of investigating how a traffic condition
spreads."

With PNNL's *data-driven approach*, users can upload real-time data and
update TranSEC on a regular basis in a transportation control center.
Engineers can use short-term forecasts for decision support to manage
traffic issues. PNNL's approach is also extensible to include weather or
other data that affect conditions on the road.

Computing power for transportation planners nationwide
------------------------------------------------------

Just as situational awareness of conditions informs an individual
driver's decisions, TranSEC's approach provides situational awareness on
a system-wide basis to help reduce urban traffic congestion.

![*TranSEC traffic estimator gives traffic engineers current traffic
state awareness to help inform infrastructure planning. (Photo by
Vince360 |
Shutterstock.com)*](https://www.pnnl.gov/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail/public/media/image/LA%20traffic_hero_0.jpg?itok=yAOfHFuF)

"Traffic engineers nationwide have not had a tool to give them anywhere
near real-time estimation of transportation network states," said Robert
Rallo, PNNL computer scientist and principal investigator on the TranSEC
project. "Being able to predict conditions an hour or more ahead would
be very valuable, to know where the blockages are going to be."

While running a full-scale city model still requires high-performance
computing resources, TranSEC is scalable. For example, a road network
with only the major highways and arterials  could be modeled on a
powerful desktop computer.

"We are working toward making TranSEC available to municipalities
nationwide," said Katherine Wolf, project manager for TranSEC.

Eventually, after further development, TranSEC could be used to help
program autonomous vehicle routes, according to the research team.

The project was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy's Vehicle Technologies Office,
Energy Efficient Mobility Systems Program.


[Pacific Northwest National Laboratory](https://www.pnnl.gov/) draws on
signature capabilities in chemistry, Earth sciences, and data analytics
to advance scientific discovery and create solutions to the nation's
toughest challenges in energy resiliency and national security. Founded
in 1965, PNNL is operated by Battelle for the U.S. Department of
Energy's Office of Science. DOE's Office of Science is the single
largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the
United States and is working to address some of the most pressing
challenges of our time. For more information, visit [PNNL's News
Center](https://www.pnnl.gov/news/). Follow us
on [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/PNNLgov/), [Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/pnnlab/), [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/company/pacific-northwest-national-laboratory/) and [Twitter](https://twitter.com/PNNLab).


