---
layout: post
title: A Brief Introduction to Causal Inference
date: 2023-09-13
categories: [artificial intelligence]
tags: [machine learning]

---

### Article Source

* [A Brief Introduction to Causal Inference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXBPtpBhGqo&list=PLoazKTcS0RzZ1SUgeOgc6SWt51gfT80N0)

---

# A Brief Introduction to Causal Inference

* We give you a taste of what we'll cover in the first few weeks of the Introduction to Causal Inference online course. Please post questions in the YouTube comments section.
* [Introduction to Causal Inference](https://www.bradyneal.com/causal-inference-course)

Introduction to Causal Inference Course Website: [causalcourse.com](causalcourse.com)


<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/DXBPtpBhGqo?si=UFa5auEdvmnVYB_e" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## Abstract

You've found the online causal inference course page. Although, the
course text is written from a machine learning perspective, this course
is meant to be for anyone with the necessary
[prerequisites](#prerequisites) who is interested in learning the basics
of causality. I do my best to integrate insights from the [many
different fields](https://www.bradyneal.com/which-causal-inference-book)
that utilize causal inference such as epidemiology, economics, political
science, machine learning, etc. You can see the [tentative course
schedule](#course-schedule-tentative) below.

You can join the [course Slack
workspace](https://join.slack.com/t/causalcourse/shared_invite/zt-qpomuitc-WRYfcbeUNb9UACJN2U~kGw)
where you can easily start discussions with other people who are
interested in causal inference. For information about office hours, see
the [office hours section](#office-hours) below. If you're interested in
leading a reading group discussion, check out the [suggested reading
group papers](#potential-reading-group-papers-by-week) to see if one
piques your interest. When emailing me about this course, please include
"\[Causal Course\]" at the beginning of your email subject to help make
sure I see your email. If you want to receive course updates, sign up
for the [course mailing list](#course-mailing-list). The main
[textbook](#course-textbook) we'll use for this course is *Introduction
to Causal Inference* (ICI), which is a book draft that I'll continually
update throughout this course.





